07-mejn-measures-and-metrics-ii/README.md, before:

% Network Measures and Metrics II
% Keith Hughitt
% 2014/03/12

Network Measures and Metrics II
===============================

Outline
-------

These notes cover the following sections of MEJN:

1. Groups of Vertices (7.8)
2. Transitivity (7.9)
3. Reciprocity (7.10)
4. Signed Edges and Structural Balance (7.11)

7.8 Groups of Vertices
----------------------

Some basic methods of defining a "group" in a network; more advanced methods of
group detection (clustering, etc.) are discussed in later sections in the book.

## 7.8.1 Cliques, Plexes, and Cores

### Cliques

> A *clique* is a maximal subset of the vertices in an *undirected* network 
> such that every member of the set is connected by and edge to every other.

Example:


```r
# load igraph and set random seed
library(igraph)
set.seed(1)

# adj matrix with two cliques
clique = matrix(0, 6, 6)
clique[0:4, 0:4] = 1
clique[3, 4] = clique[4, 5] = clique[4, 5] = clique[4, 6] = clique[5, 6] = 1
diag(clique) = 0

# convert to graph
g = graph.adjacency(clique, mode = "undirected")

# color cliques
V(g)$color = ifelse(V(g) %in% c(1, 2, 3), "#1E90FF", "#FF1493")
V(g)[4]$color = "#8C14FF"

# plot cliques
plot(g)
```

![plot of chunk clique](figure/clique.png) 


- In the above figure, nodes 1-4 and 4-6 each form separate cliques
- Cliques can overlap.
- Most stringent approach to finding groups in networks.

### *k*-plexes

> A *k*-plex of size *n* is the maximal subset of *n* vertices within a network
> such that each vertex is connected to at least *n - k* of the others.

- *k*-plexes are a relaxed version of the concept of a clique.
- If *k*=1, then you are back at the definition of a clique
- Nodes in a *k*-plex must be connected to at least *k*-1 other nodes in the
  *k*-plex.
- Example: a group of friends in a social network where most people know most
  other people in the network.
- *k*-plexes can overlap.
- MEJN: possible useful generalization -- require each member be connected to
  some *fraction* of the other members.

### *k*-cores

> A *k*-core is a maximal subset of vertices such that each is connected to at
> least *k* others in the subset.

- Similar to *k*-plex idea except that minimum number of connections required
  is defined as a hard value, irrespective of the size of the group.
- A *k*-core with *n* vertices is the same as a (*n-k*)-plex
- *k*-cores *cannot* overlap; overlapping *k*-cores can be combined into one.

### *k*-cliques

> A *k-clique* is a maximal subset of vertices such that each is no more than a
> distance *k* away from any of the others via the edges of the network.

- This is a generalization to the distance of the relationships between nodes.
- *k*=1 is just an ordinary clique

#### Example: Finding significant interactions in yeaste PPI data

![Yeast PPI network](images/ng.167-F1.jpg)
(Zhu et al, 2008)

In the above example from Zhu et al. (2008), *k*-cliques with k>=5 are found
for a yeast protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset, and then grouped
together to form "clique communities". These groups of cliques were found to
correlate between with co-expression data and provide better indicators of
actual interacting proteins. Each node in the above figure depicts a single
*k*-clique.


### *k*-clans / *k*-clubs

- *k*-cliques do not necessarily produce sub-networks where all of the nodes
  are connected by a path to one another (see example in book on p196).
- *k-clans* and *k-clubs* are two modified versions of this definition which
  impose restrictions on the connectivity of the sub-groups.

## 7.8.2 Components and *k*-Components

> A *k-component* (or *k-connected component*) is a maximal subset of vertices
> such that each is reachable from each of the others by at least *k*
> vertex-indepedent paths.

- *vertex-independent paths* are paths which share none of the same vertices
  except for the start and end (also, recall that the number of
  vertex-independent paths between two nodes equals the size of the vertex cut
  set between those nodes.)
- This is generalization of the idea of a *component* or *connected component*
- *k*-components are related to the concept of network robustness (relates to
  the number of nodes that would have to be removed for two nodes to become
  disconnected)
- Social network lit. sometimes uses slightly modified definition to exclude
  non-contiguous sets of *k*-components.

7.9 Transitivity
----------------

## Overview

Transitive relations (math):
- if A ○ B, and B ○ C, then A ○ C
- e.g. equality operator

In some cases, various relations on the vertices of a network may be
transitive.
- Ex. "connected by an edge"
- Networks showing this property are themselves said to be *transitive*
- "Perfect transitivity" ⇒ Each network component is fully connected
- "Partial transitivity" ⇒ If AB and BC, AC is not guaranteed to have an edge,
  but is more likely. (Here, "AB" means that A and B are vertices in the
  network and there is an edge between them.)

Quantifying the level of transitivity:

- if *uv* and *vw*, then the two-edge path *uvw* exists.
- if *uw* also exists, then we say the path is *closed* -- it forms a loop of
  length 3 (a triangle) in the network.
- SNA -- *u*, *v*, and *w* form a *closed triad*

## Clustering Coefficient

> We define the clustering coefficient to be the fraction of paths of length
> two in the network that are closed.

$$C = \frac{\text{(number of closed paths of length two)}}{\text{(number of
paths of length two)}}$$

![clustering
coefficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/khughitt/notes/master/courses/Coursera-Network_Analysis_in_Systems_Biology/images/clustering_coefficent_ravasz.jpg)
(Ravasz et al. 2002)

- *C*=1 perfect transivity - all components are cliques
- *C*=0 no closed triads in the network (e.g. a tree)
- Provides a measure of how connected the neighbors of nodes are to one another
  on average.

## 7.9.1 Local clustering and redundancy

We can extend the above concept to a measure to single nodes:

$$C_i = \frac{\text{(number of pairs of neighbors of $i$ that are connected)}}{\text{(number of
pairs of neighbors of $i$)}}$$

- Measures how connected the neighbors of a node are to one another.
- Sometimes referred to as the *local clustering coefficient*
- By convention, we set this to zero for nodes with degree 0 or 1.
- Often correlated with betweeness centrality (section 7.7)
    - Both can be used to tell us about how "influential" a vertex is (e.g. by
      having power over information flow between other nodes in the network)
    - Betweeness considers all nodes in components, but local clustering just
      looks at neighbors of a node.
    - Local clustering much easier to compute.

### Structural holes

- In networks where neighbors are often connect to one another (e.g. social
  nets), the local clustering coefficient can help to find areas where this is
  not the case.
- These locations are referred to as *structural holes*

References
----------
- M.E.J. Newman, (2010) Networks: An Introduction

Commit message:

updated section on local clustering coefficients

07-mejn-measures-and-metrics-ii/README.md, after:

Network Measures and Metrics II
===============================
Keith Hughitt
2014/03/12

Outline
-------

These notes cover the following sections of
[MEJN](http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mejn/networks-an-introduction/):

1. Groups of Vertices (7.8)
2. Transitivity (7.9)
3. Reciprocity (7.10)
4. Signed Edges and Structural Balance (7.11)

7.8 Groups of Vertices
----------------------

Some basic methods of defining a "group" in a network; more advanced methods of
group detection (clustering, etc.) are discussed in later sections in the book.

## 7.8.1 Cliques, Plexes, and Cores

### Cliques

> A *clique* is a maximal subset of the vertices in an *undirected* network 
> such that every member of the set is connected by and edge to every other.

Example:


```r
# load igraph and set random seed
library(igraph)
set.seed(1)

# adj matrix with two cliques
clique = matrix(0, 6, 6)
clique[0:4, 0:4] = 1
clique[3, 4] = clique[4, 5] = clique[4, 5] = clique[4, 6] = clique[5, 6] = 1
diag(clique) = 0

# convert to graph
g = graph.adjacency(clique, mode = "undirected")

# color cliques
V(g)$color = ifelse(V(g) %in% c(1, 2, 3), "#1E90FF", "#FF1493")
V(g)[4]$color = "#8C14FF"

# plot cliques
plot(g)
```

![plot of chunk clique](figure/clique.png) 


- In the above figure, nodes 1-4 and 4-6 each form separate cliques
- Cliques can overlap.
- Most stringent approach to finding groups in networks.

### *k*-plexes

> A *k*-plex of size *n* is the maximal subset of *n* vertices within a network
> such that each vertex is connected to at least *n - k* of the others.

- *k*-plexes are a relaxed version of the concept of a clique.
- If *k*=1, then you are back at the definition of a clique
- Nodes in a *k*-plex must be connected to at least *k*-1 other nodes in the
  *k*-plex.
- Example: a group of friends in a social network where most people know most
  other people in the network.
- *k*-plexes can overlap.
- MEJN: possible useful generalization -- require each member be connected to
  some *fraction* of the other members.

### *k*-cores

> A *k*-core is a maximal subset of vertices such that each is connected to at
> least *k* others in the subset.

- Similar to *k*-plex idea except that minimum number of connections required
  is defined as a hard value, irrespective of the size of the group.
- A *k*-core with *n* vertices is the same as a (*n-k*)-plex
- *k*-cores *cannot* overlap; overlapping *k*-cores can be combined into one.

### *k*-cliques

> A *k-clique* is a maximal subset of vertices such that each is no more than a
> distance *k* away from any of the others via the edges of the network.

- This is a generalization to the distance of the relationships between nodes.
- *k*=1 is just an ordinary clique

#### Example: Finding significant interactions in yeaste PPI data

![Yeast PPI network](images/ng.167-F1.jpg)
(Zhu et al, 2008)

In the above example from Zhu et al. (2008), *k*-cliques with k>=5 are found
for a yeast protein-protein interaction (PPI) dataset, and then grouped
together to form "clique communities". These groups of cliques were found to
correlate between with co-expression data and provide better indicators of
actual interacting proteins. Each node in the above figure depicts a single
*k*-clique.


### *k*-clans / *k*-clubs

- *k*-cliques do not necessarily produce sub-networks where all of the nodes
  are connected by a path to one another (see example in book on p196).
- *k-clans* and *k-clubs* are two modified versions of this definition which
  impose restrictions on the connectivity of the sub-groups.

## 7.8.2 Components and *k*-Components

> A *k-component* (or *k-connected component*) is a maximal subset of vertices
> such that each is reachable from each of the others by at least *k*
> vertex-indepedent paths.

- *vertex-independent paths* are paths which share none of the same vertices
  except for the start and end (also, recall that the number of
  vertex-independent paths between two nodes equals the size of the vertex cut
  set between those nodes.)
- This is generalization of the idea of a *component* or *connected component*
- *k*-components are related to the concept of network robustness (relates to
  the number of nodes that would have to be removed for two nodes to become
  disconnected)
- Social network lit. sometimes uses slightly modified definition to exclude
  non-contiguous sets of *k*-components.

7.9 Transitivity
----------------

## Overview

Transitive relations (math):
- if A ○ B, and B ○ C, then A ○ C
- e.g. equality operator

In some cases, various relations on the vertices of a network may be
transitive.
- Ex. "connected by an edge"
- Networks showing this property are themselves said to be *transitive*
- "Perfect transitivity" ⇒ Each network component is fully connected
- "Partial transitivity" ⇒ If AB and BC, AC is not guaranteed to have an edge,
  but is more likely. (Here, "AB" means that A and B are vertices in the
  network and there is an edge between them.)

Quantifying the level of transitivity:

- if *uv* and *vw*, then the two-edge path *uvw* exists.
- if *uw* also exists, then we say the path is *closed* -- it forms a loop of
  length 3 (a triangle) in the network.
- SNA -- *u*, *v*, and *w* form a *closed triad*

## Clustering Coefficient

> We define the clustering coefficient to be the fraction of paths of length
> two in the network that are closed.

$$C = \frac{\text{(number of closed paths of length two)}}{\text{(number of
paths of length two)}}$$

![clustering
coefficient](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/khughitt/notes/master/courses/Coursera-Network_Analysis_in_Systems_Biology/images/clustering_coefficent_ravasz.jpg)
(Ravasz et al. 2002)

- *C*=1 perfect transivity - all components are cliques
- *C*=0 no closed triads in the network (e.g. a tree)
- Provides a measure of how connected the neighbors of nodes are to one another
  on average.


## 7.9.1 Local clustering and redundancy

We can extend the above concept to a measure to single nodes:

### Local clustering coefficient

$$C_i = \frac{\text{(number of pairs of neighbors of $i$ that are connected)}}{\text{(number of
pairs of neighbors of $i$)}}$$

- Measures how connected the neighbors of a node are to one another.
- Sometimes referred to as the *local clustering coefficient*
- By convention, we set this to zero for nodes with degree 0 or 1.
- Often correlated with betweeness centrality (section 7.7)
    - Both can be used to tell us about how "influential" a vertex is (e.g. by
      having power over information flow between other nodes in the network)
    - Betweeness considers all nodes in components, but local clustering just
      looks at neighbors of a node.
    - Local clustering much easier to compute.
- Watts and Strogatz (1998) proprosed an alternative definition of the global
  clustering coefficient of a network based on averaging the local coefficient
  for each node.
  - $$C_{WS} = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n C_i$$ where *n* is the number of
    vertices in the network.
  - This results in a different value than the version described in the above
    section!
  - Both are in use although MEJN prefers the earlier definition since it is
    easy to interpret and less influenced by verticed with low degree.

### Redundancy

> The redundancy $R_i$ of a vertex *i* is the mean number of connections from a
> neighbor of *i* to other neighbors of *i*.

- Clustering coefficient is similar to this but scaled between 0 and 1

### Structural holes

- In networks where neighbors are often connect to one another (e.g. social
  nets), the local clustering coefficient can help to find areas where this is
  not the case.
- These locations are referred to as *structural holes*

7.10 Reciprocity
----------------

References
----------
- M.E.J. Newman, (2010) Networks: An Introduction
